Estimates vary,
but some say that the basic chemical elements
that make up the human body
can be valued at as little as five dollars.
And that’s understandable
when we read the description
of man’s creation at Genesis 2:7.
Please open your Bibles to this scripture.
And as we read it, notice the materials
Jehovah used when he created man.
Genesis 2:7 says:
“And Jehovah God went on
“to form the man out of dust from the ground
“and to blow
into his nostrils the breath of life,
and the man became a living person.”
Jehovah took basic elements from the ground
and formed them into a complex structure.
Then he added the breath of life
and raised the value of that dust
to a level
that can be described only as priceless.
From five dollars worth of dust,
God created a walking, talking,
intelligent human made in God’s own image.
Since man is made
from the dust of the ground,
it’s fitting that the prophets
Jeremiah and Isaiah
used the example of a potter molding clay
to illustrate
our relationship with our Creator.
There’s so much
we can say about this illustration,
but I’d like to focus on three lessons
that we can learn
from the potter and the clay.
The first is be content.
Be content
with how Jehovah molds and uses us.
Second, be patient and endure.
And third, cultivate an obedient heart.
Let’s consider the first lesson:
Be content
with how Jehovah molds and uses us.
Pottery making
is a highly treasured art form in Japan.
And depending on where the clay came from
and the methods used,
the results can be very unique.
Pottery made in the town of Bizen,
in western Japan,
is called bizen-yaki, or Bizen ware,
and it is noted for its earth tones
and the fact that it is not glazed.
Mashiko-yaki,
made in the town of Mashiko, north of Tokyo,
is colorful, and it is glazed.
Each piece of pottery
from these different regions
has unique characteristics.
But no matter what the color, consistency,
or origin of the clay,
the final result is still a piece of pottery.
We can say
the same thing about Jehovah’s people.
Each one of us is custom-made.
It’s true that we come
from 240 lands around the world.
Our physical features, our customs,
our languages,
and our personalities vary greatly.
But we all have one thing in common:
We are all molded by the same Potter.
As Jehovah uses his Word, his holy spirit,
and his organization
to mold us into a desirable vessel,
we may notice that a lump of clay
on the Potter’s wheel next to us
is taking a different shape.
‘He’s becoming a useful jar.
‘She’s starting
to look like a beautiful vase.
I’m just a plain old bowl.’
Well, there’s no reason
for us to be envious
or to become competitive.
Rather, we should be happy
that Jehovah has
such a variety of loyal worshippers,
all using their God-given gifts
to bring him praise.
Please open your Bibles
to 1 Corinthians chapter 12;
we’ll read verses 14, 17, and 18.
And here we find the illustration
of the human body being used
to show the great variety of gifts
that we have in the Christian congregation.
So there’s no reason
for us to be competitive.
First Corinthians 12:14, 17, 18 reads:
“For, indeed, the body is made up
not of one member but of many.”
And verse 17:
“If the whole body were an eye,
“where would the sense of hearing be?
“If it were all hearing,
where would the sense of smell be?
“But now God has arranged
each of the body members just as he pleased.”
Remember, Jehovah is the Potter;
we are the clay.
And he will use each one of us
in a way that utilizes our strong points
to help us to do his will.
For the second lesson,
please open your Bibles
to James chapter 1,
and we’ll read verse 4.
This scripture talks about the need
for us to be patient or to endure.
James 1:4 says:
“But let endurance complete its work,
“so that you may be
complete and sound in all respects,
not lacking in anything.”
So why do we need endurance
in order to be molded?
Well, pottery making
is a time-consuming process,
and that’s why the potter uses the wheel
to keep the clay spinning around and around,
repeatedly going over the same places.
And gradually, he gives the clay its shape.
In addition,
even before putting the clay on the wheel,
the potter washes it to remove any debris,
such as pebbles and sticks.
Then he may tramp on it with his feet
to make it pasty and malleable.
Next, he kneads it with his hands,
like kneading bread dough.
And finally, he places it
on the potter’s wheel.
In the same way,
before Jehovah can start to mold us,
major preparations are needed.
When we start to learn the truth,
we have a lot of debris
mixed in with the clay.
The debris may be personality traits,
some form of wrong conduct,
or false religious beliefs and practices.
Once we correct these matters,
we dedicate our lives to Jehovah,
and he puts us on the wheel
to continue the molding process.
At that point,
we all are terribly out of shape,
but Jehovah patiently molds us
into a desirable vessel.
Some of us have been
in the molding process for decades;
others just started in recent years.
But no matter how long we’ve been spinning
on the Great Potter’s wheel, we must endure
and remain soft and pliable.
Cultivating an obedient heart
will help us to do this,
and that is our third lesson.
When Solomon became king of Israel,
he made one request of Jehovah.
It’s recorded at 1 Kings 3:9,
where he prayed:
“So grant your servant an obedient heart
to judge your people,
to discern between good and bad.”
Having “an obedient heart”
means allowing Jehovah’s Word
to mold our desires,
our affections, our emotions,
our feelings, our motives, our goals in life.
Interestingly, much pottery is hollow,
and that means the potter has to put
his hands and fingers inside the clay
to give it its proper form.
In the same way,
God’s Word has to get into our hearts
to build us up from within.
Please open your Bibles to Psalm 143:10.
These words of David
reveal a humble, teachable spirit
that will help us
to cultivate an obedient heart.
Psalm 143:10 says:
“Teach me to do your will,
for you are my God.
Your spirit is good;
may it lead me on level ground.”
Yes, there is much we can learn
from the illustration
of the potter and the clay.
First of all, it teaches us contentment
with the way Jehovah
is molding us and our fellow workers.
It also shows us the need for endurance
and the need to cultivate an obedient heart.
So may we continue to submit
to the gentle, loving hands
of our Great Potter.
If we do that, sometime in the future,
he’s going to stop spinning that wheel.
He’s going to look down
at what used to be five dollars worth of clay
and say with a smile, ‘Perfect!’
Well, on hearing that,
how happy we will be that,
like Isaiah, we said:
“O Jehovah, . . . we are the clay,
and you are our Potter.”